Cripple Mr Onion, v3.0Cripple Mr Onion, v3.0 


Reconstructed by Andrew C. Millard 
from "Witches Abroad" by Terry Pratchett. 
Thanks to Terry Tao concerning the modifiers. 


This description of Cripple Mr Onion is in six parts: 
  Introduction, 
  The Hands, 
  The Non-Gambling Game, 
  The Gambling Game, 
  The Modifiers, 
  Final Points. 



1. Introduction: 


Cripple Mr Onion requires two standard decks of playing cards, preferably one 
having the English or French suits clubs, spades, hearts and diamonds, and the 
second having the Spanish or Italian suits swords, staves, cups and coins - for 
the purpose of forming flushes, these are taken to be paired in their respective 
order given above: 
clubs is paired with swords, 
spades is paired with staves, 
hearts is paired with cups, 
diamonds is paired with coins. 
If a Spanish or Italian suit cannot be obtained, two English or French decks can 
be used adequately for most purposes; see the modifiers for further comments on 
this. 
The game also requires at least two players, but not more than seven [this isn't 
to do with the number eight for a specific reason, but a result of the fact that 
there aren't enough cards for more than seven players], with a ready supply of 
small coinage or tokens when gambling takes place, and the players arranged as 
evenly as possible around the table on which the game is played. A container 
able to hold cards should be placed centrally on the table - this is to be the 
discard pot - along with another container for coins or tokens if gambling is to 
take place: this is the Pot. 



2. The Hands: 


Cripple Mr Onion revolves around forming groups of cards which either sum 
exactly to twenty-one (an onion) or come close to this total without exceeding 
it; in the usual fashion, a picture card (P) is worth ten, an ace (A) is worth 
one or eleven, and other cards are worth their face value: a ten (T) is worth 
ten, a nine is worth nine, and so on. Since groups of cards which sum exactly to 
twenty-one can be formed in various ways, they are ranked in a particular order 
according to their composition, along with a few other groups which do not give 
twenty-one in total but which are of some interest; these special hands, 
described below, are worth more than any other valid combinations of cards and 
usually dominate the play. 
There are thirteen categories of winning hands and in increasing order of worth 
are: 
  Bagel: this is a combination of two cards which totals exactly twenty; it is, 
  therefore, one of TT, TP, PP or 9A. 
  two-card onion: this is a combination of two cards which totals exactly 
  twenty-one; it is, therefore, either TA or PA. 
  Broken Flush: this is a group of at least three cards, summing to at least 
  sixteen (but not more than twenty-one) with all of the cards except for one in 
  the same suit-pair. 
  three-card onion: this is a group of three cards which totals twenty-one 
  exactly; examples are ATT, 56T, and 579. 
  Flush: this is a group of at least three cards, summing to at least sixteen 
  (but not more than twenty-one) with all of the cards in the same suit-pair. 
  four-card onion: ... four cards which total twenty-one; for example, A55T, 
  2469, and 3378. 
  Broken Royal: this is a special case of a three-card onion where the three 
  cards are specifically 678 (of any suit-pairs). 
  five-card onion: ... five cards ... e.g. A235T, 23466, and 33348. 
  Royal: this is another special three-card onion being 777. 
  six-card onion: ... six cards ... e.g. A2233T and A23456. 
  (Wild Royal: this is a combination that may only be played when eights are 
  wild - see the modifiers for details - since it consists of three wild 
  eights.) 
  seven-card onion: ... seven cards ... e.g. A223445. 
  Onion: an Onion (capitalised letter 'o') is a two card combination of a 
  picture card and an ace; HOWEVER, PA on its own is just a two- card onion 
  (place two above), since to occupy this exalted position, the group must 
  consist of two Onions, PAPA or Double Onion, or three Onions, PAPAPA or 3[PA] 
  or Triple Onion, or four Onions, 4[PA] or Lesser Onion, or even five Onions, 
  5[PA] or Great Onion. The Onions themselves are arranged according to their 
  worth, with Double Onion the lowest and Great Onion the best. 
Notice that the maximum number of cards making up an onion is seven (there is no 
eight-card onion) and that for PA to be of any real value, the player must hold 
at least two picture cards and two aces. Also, if a player should be unlucky 
enough to receive multiple bagels, the qualifiers "double", "triple", "lesser" 
and "great" (with small initials) are used. 
Since each player is ultimately in posession of ten cards, a number of groups, 
most of them usually winning hands, can be formed; the objective of any 
individual player is therefore to form the ten cards into the best possible set 
of groups, with each of the ten cards taking part in only one of the groups. For 
example, representing clubs and swords by 'c', spades and staves by 's', hearts 
and cups by 'h' and diamonds and coins by 'd', the hand: 
3c 3s 4s Js Ah 7h Qh Ad 4d 6d 
is best split into: Double Onion - JsAhQhAd five-card onion - 3c3s4s4d7h a six - 
6d 
whilst the hand: 
9c 4s Qs Ks 4h Jh Ad 7d Td Kd 
is best split into: four-card onion - Ad4s7d9c double bagel - QsKsJhTd a 
fourteen - 4hKd. 
>From this list of winning hands, it follows that some cards are intrinsically 
more valuable than others: tens, for example, are only useful in bagels and 
small-card onions whereas twos and threes are necessary for constructing many- 
card onions; aces and picture cards are obviously of great value. However, a 
player's strategy in selecting cards for replacement (see the game descriptions 
and certain of the modifiers) should also be influenced by the number of 
players, and whether eights are wild or not, since these factors influence the 
relative likelihood of each hand winning the round. 



3. The Non-Gambling Game: 


At the beginning of each round, one player is identified as the Dealer, with the 
player to the Dealer's left as the Elder and the player to the Dealer's right as 
the Younger - this sets the order of precedence in being dealt cards and in 
winning in the event of a tie as Dealer, Elder, other players in order and, 
lastly, Younger. In the event that the Dealership changes, these identifiers 
move to be based around the new Dealer. The round opens when the Dealer shuffles 
the pack of all 104 cards and the Younger cuts the pack. 
All the players are dealt five cards in this order: the Dealer receives two 
cards and deals all the other players, in order from Elder to Younger, three 
cards; the Dealer then receives three cards and deals the other players two 
[this is done to speed up the dealing, which isn't exactly the most interesting 
part of the game]. Then, in turn, from Elder to Younger, each player discards up 
to four cards into the discard pot and announces the number of discards to the 
Dealer who replaces them from the top of the pack; the Dealer then discards and 
replaces, also announcing the number thrown away. It is important to note that 
up to this point all cards have been dealt face down, each player is only aware 
of their own cards and, by way of the draw, ought to have a better hand than was 
originally dealt. 
The second set of five cards each is now dealt in the following way: the Dealer 
receives five cards face down on the table, and then, in turn from Elder to 
Younger, each other player is dealt five cards face up on the table. Cards dealt 
face up on the table must remain that way, although the owner of those cards may 
rearrange them there if desired. 
Now the final part of the round, Showdown, takes place. Beginning from the 
Elder, the highest card grouping is declared and displayed on the table; if the 
player to the left of the Elder cannot equal, beat or play some modifier that 
affects the Elder's cards, that player's cards are all placed face up on the 
table, in their groupings if the player wishes, and that player is out of the 
round; the comparison of the next leftward player's cards with the Elder's then 
takes place. If the Elder's cards are equalled, then the next card grouping must 
be considered. If the Elder's cards are beaten, then the Elder has the 
opportunity to play a modifier or rearrange the card grouping in an attempt to 
obtain a better arrangement; once the Elder's cards are undoubtedly beaten, 
however, the Elder is out of the round and the comparison of the currently 
leading player's cards with the next leftward player's takes place. By this 
process of comparison, consideration of lower groupings, rearrangement of card 
groups and playing of modifiers, and knocking out of players, the holder of the 
best set of cards, between the Elder and the Younger, is found. Finally, the 
Dealer's cards are compared with the only player left in, and the process of 
finding the better cards is repeated; the player who holds the better cards has 
then won the game. Note that in the event of either a complete tie between two 
players' cards or an impasse due to circular use of modifiers, the player of 
greater seniority wins - often, this means that the Dealer wins. Once all the 
players but one have been knocked out, leaving the winner holding the best 
cards, the round is over, the cards and discards are collected up and the winner 
becomes the Dealer for the next round. 



4. The Gambling Game. 


There are two types of betting that are used in the gambling version of Cripple 
Mr Onion and these will be described before the details of how they fit into the 
game are given. 
The first type is "matching the Dealer's stake". First, the Dealer chooses a 
number of coins or tokens to be the stake, on the basis of the cards known to 
the Dealer, and, naming the amount, places it in the Pot; if the Dealer wishes, 
the amount may be zero. Then, when called upon by the Dealer to do so, each 
player must either match the stake, placing an equal amount in the Pot, or fold, 
placing all cards in the discard pot and losing any claim to the Pot in that 
round; of course, if the stake is zero, all remaining players can stay in for 
free. 
The second type is "raising the Dealer". When called upon by the Dealer, each 
player may choose to make an extra bet against the Dealer, according to cards 
that are known to that player. If the player chooses to raise, the chosen number 
of coins or tokens are placed on the player's cards and the amount is named. 
Finally, when all the players who have not yet folded have done this, the Dealer 
must place an amount equal to the total value of raises into the Pot - and all 
the individual raises then go into the Pot as well - or lose the Dealership: 
often this means that the Dealer must fold. 
Each round begins in the same way as for the non-gambling game, except that now, 
before the first deal takes place, every player places a previously agreed 
amount, the Stake, into the Pot as the ante. Then after every player has 
discarded and received replacements, the first round of betting takes place. 
The Dealer selects a stake, as described above, and then, from the Elder to the 
Younger, asks each player first to match that stake and then to raise it; if the 
Dealer cannot match the total value of the raises, then the Dealer folds. This 
matching and raising occurs twice. The Dealer then selects a stake for the third 
time and again asks each player, in order, to match it; this time, however, the 
players are not asked to raise. 
The second set of five cards for each remaining player is then dealt as follows: 
as before, the Dealer receives five cards face down, but now each player has the 
option of buying from one to all of the five cards face down, at the price of an 
amount equal to the Stake per card, instead of receiving them all face up. Cards 
may be bought one at a time, if desired, and once the player has finished buying 
cards, the Dealer deals the remainder from the five to that player face up on 
the table in front of the player. As each player receives the full complement of 
ten cards, an extra bet may be made, in the same manner as raising the Dealer, 
and then, once every remaining player has ten cards, the Dealer must consider 
all the extra bets. 
If the Dealer matches the total extra bets made, the game continues with the 
second round of betting described below; however, if the Dealer does not wish to 
match the extra bets, then the Dealership changes *without* the Dealer folding - 
this is the only time when this can take place. The Dealer gives the Dealership 
to the Elder who, to become the new Dealer, must match the total extra bets, the 
Elder's own extra bet going into the Pot if the Dealership is accepted; of 
course, if the Elder does not accept, the Dealership is passed left again until 
one of the other players accepts it, or until it has gone full circle with 
no-one wanting it - in that case, everyone folds, the Pot becomes the ante for 
the next round, the old Dealer remains as Dealer, and the next round starts 
afresh. 
Once the extra bets have been matched, be it by the original Dealer, the Elder 
or one of the other players, the second round of betting takes place. This 
consists of two stages of matching and raising as in the first round of betting, 
but now not followed by a third stage of matching only. 
Finally, Showdown takes place, exactly as in the non-gambling game, but now, of 
course, the winner claims the contents of the Pot as the prize for winning. 
In the event that the Dealer folds, the Dealership is auctioned as follows: from 
the Elder to the Younger, the players who are still in are asked by the old 
Dealer if they wish to be the new Dealer - if the player wishes to be the new 
Dealer, that player must advance an amount equal to the Stake. If another 
player, when asked, also wishes to be Dealer, then that player must match the 
existing bid and advance another amount equal to the Stake. This process 
continues around and around the table, with each prospective Dealer making sure 
that the most recent player's bid is at least an amount equal to the Stake 
higher that the last bid, until all the players except for one have declined to 
advance any more, having placed their own total bid in the Pot as they declined, 
and the single player left becomes the new Dealer, placing the winning bid in 
the pot. If nobody wishes to be the new Dealer, all the players fold, the Pot 
becomes the ante for the next round, the old Dealer stays as Dealer and another 
round beings anew. 



5. The Modifiers: 


The modifiers have usually been created for one of two reasons, either to make 
the game a little more interesting and a little more uncertain, or to decrease 
the chances of winning with a specific hand. It is not necessary to use any of 
them, apart from numbers zero, which gives the game its name, and one, which 
makes many-card onions and then Onions more probable, and in a game, say, 
between four hardened professionals, even the Null Eights Rules would probably 
not be used. The employment of the modifiers, therefore, is left to the 
discretion of the players, but some possibilities for using the modifiers beyond 
number zero are as follows: 
  just modifer #1; 
  modifiers numbers 1 to 3; 
  bring in the modifiers as the game progresses, one in every or every other 
  round; 
  let the Dealer, for each round, declare which modifiers are in force in that 
  round; 
  play all the modifiers from the beginning. 
A number of the modifiers use specific cards to represent mythological and 
not-so mythological Discworld characters, and, if two decks of cards with the 
same suits are used, confusion may arise as to which of the two, say, queen of 
spades is to represent the Lady. A solution, if not particularly satisfactory, 
to this is to mark one of the two cards with a symbol, in this case, for 
example, the letter L, on the face side so that the marked card becomes the 
relevant one for the modifier and the other becomes an ordinary card. 
The modifiers are all, some to a greater extent than others, based on Discworld 
life, mythology and beliefs and have been assumed to have evolved, with the 
game, over many centuries; none of the modifiers are arbitrary in their action 
or purpose, but a detailed knowledge of the Discworld is not necessary to use 
them. Finally, the ordering of the modifiers in the list below is, apart from 
the Crippling Rules in position zero, largely accidental and is not a guide to 
their usefulness or effectiveness. 
Modifier #0: Crippling Rules. 
  A nine-card running flush may be used to cripple a Great Onion and win the 
  game. 
  A ten-card running flush outcripples a nine-card running flush in crippling a 
  Great Onion and may also cripple a Lesser Onion. 
[Once a Great Onion or Lesser Onion have been crippled, the usual process of 
Showdown stops, and the player with the crippling hand wins immediately.] 
Modifier #1: Null Eights Rules. 
  During a round in which eights are not wild (see ii), an eight may be used as 
  if it had value zero in order to trump up an onion. In the event of a tie 
  between two onions with equal numbers of cards, the onion with the fewer null 
  eights wins. 
  In the round following a round in which a null eight has been played, eights 
  are wild, acting as any regular card. The wild Royal, three wild eights, may 
  then be played. In the next round, eights return to their original role. 
[To "trump up an onion" means to make a four-card onion into a five-card onion 
by the addition of one null eight, or to make a three-card onion into a 
seven-card onion with four. Note, again, that there are no onions beyond 
seven-card and that wild eights cannot be used as either null eights or as any 
of the special cards giving rise to later modifiers.] 
Modifier #2: Wild Crippling Rule. 
In a round in which eights are wild, to successfully cripple the relevant Onion, 
the running flush must have at most the same number of wild cards as the Onion 
being crippled. 
Modifier #3: Octavo Rule. 
When eights are wild, the card group consisting of eight eights can be 
considered as a Lesser Onion, but beats other Lesser Onions and may not be 
crippled like a Lesser Onion of any other composition, but may be crippled like 
a Great Onion. 
Modifier #4: The Lady's Rules. 
  If eights are not wild, the queen of spades may be declared, before or during 
  Showdown, and replaced by the player's choice of one of the next two cards 
  from the deck, the chosen card taking up the place of the queen; the other 
  card goes to the discard pot. This move may not be rescinded. 
  When eights are wild, the queen of spades devalues one ace, for every other 
  player, that would otherwise be played as having value eleven, to value one 
  only. This does not affect any aces in a Great Onion, but may affect cards, in 
  any grouping, which, by being wild or by other means, would otherwise be 
  played with value eleven. 
[To "declare" means to put the card on the table face up and point it out to the 
other players; here, of course, the queen may no longer be used in forming card 
groupings since a replacement card has been received, but should be left near 
the player on the table rather than in the discard pot.] 
Modifier #5: Fate's Rules. 
  If the queen of spades has been declared and replaced, the king of cups may 
  also be declared and replaced in a like manner, in the process making all aces 
  held by the player who used the queen of spades have value zero. 
  If eights are wild, the king of cups may be declared so that eights 
  immediately cease to be wild; a different player who has the queen of spades, 
  whether visible, played or not, may then make his own eights wild again. The 
  king of cups may not be revoked once declared, and a single player may not use 
  the king of cups and then the queen of spades in this way. 
["Zeroed" cards are of no use in the game, and cannot be used like null eights 
to trump up an onion.] 
Modifier #6: Great A'Tuin's Rule. 
Declaring the queen of coins allows the player to reduce the value of one of the 
player's cards by eight points and to increase the value of a different card by 
eight points. The two affected cards must still have value between one and 
eleven inclusive. 
[A two that is shifted up to value ten may be considered a picture card, a three 
shifted up to eleven as an ace of value eleven.] 
Modifier #7: The Elephants' Rule. 
Any four cards, each being either a nine or a ten, or an eight when eights are 
wild, that are declared with the queen of coins in one player's hand, allow that 
player to shift as many points as are needed to to generate a Double Onion. This 
Double Onion may be beaten by any other Double Onion. Any nines or tens in the 
player's hand that are not involved in the shift may be considered as ones, not 
aces, and twos respectively. 
[Since the five cards involved here have only been declared, and not exchanged 
as well, they are, of course, still playable as cards in groups. Remember that a 
ten may not take the role of a picture card in an Onion - a shifted nine, eight 
etc. is needed. With two nines, two tens and the queen of coins, a possible 
shift is: add one each to the nines and tens - hence the Double Onion - and take 
four from the queen of coins to be a six.] 
Modifier #8: The Sender of Eight's Rules. 
  When eights are not wild, a visible jack of diamonds makes any aces belonging 
  to a player who uses any eights become zeroed (see #5i). 
  When eights are wild, a visible jack of diamonds zeroes all aces and disallows 
  eights from taking on value one or eleven. 
Modifier #9: Death's Rules. 
  When eights are not wild, a visible king of swords makes one picture card in 
  every player's hand that has two or more picture cards have no part in forming 
  a Double Onion. 
  When eights are wild, a visible king of swords makes one picture card in every 
  player's hand that has two or more picture cards have no part in forming 
  either a Double Onion or a Triple Onion. 
[The "killed" picture card can still take part in groups other than the 
specified Onions.] 
Modifier #10: The Archchancellor's Rules. 
  Any player who plays the jack of staves may not also play an eight as having 
  value eight. 
  If the jack of staves is declared at any time during the game, the king of 
  swords must also be declared if held by another player; if the king of swords 
  is declared, then all the other players must also declare one previously 
  undisclosed card each. If the king of swords is not held by another player, 
  the the jack of staves becomes wild for the rest of the round. 
Modifier #11: The Fool's Rule. 
If, at any time before Showdown, the jack of clubs is declared, then, for the 
rest of the round, bagels change places with Onions in the order of winning card 
groupings. 
[That is: the two-card onion and the single bagel change places; the Double, 
Triple and Lesser Onions are exchanged with the double, triple and lesser bagels 
respectively; the great bagel becomes only beaten by, but may also be crippled 
like, the Great Onion which remains at the top of the list. This makes bagels 
worth something, other than a tie-breaker. The jack of clubs, of course, can 
still take part in bagels, and any other card grouping.] 



6. Final Points: 


Cripple Mr Onion was first mentioned in "Wyrd Sisters" and has, since then, been 
seen in a number of places; the most notable of these, to date, is the section 
in "Witches Abroad" on the riverboat, and it is from this section that the game 
has been reconstructed. Loosely speaking, it is a cross between pontoon (or 
blackjack) and poker, played with a deck of cards having eight suits, although, 
as is to be expected, the nature of the Discworld has given Cripple Mr Onion 
features found in no other game. 
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=- 
Andrew C. Millard Physics Department, Princeton University. e-mail: 
millard@pupgg.princeton.edu 



This WWW page maintained by Robert R. Collier, mautx@csv.warwick.ac.uk
